---
title: "Interface Segregation Principle - SOLID part 4"
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/tools.jpg
  overlay_image: /assets/images/tools.jpg
---

SOLID is an acronym that groups five basic principles every object oriented programmer should know. This principes set the base to write and maitain a robust code base.

1. [Single responsibility principle.](../SOLID-S/)
2. [Open/closed principle.](../SOLID-O/)
3. [Liskov substitution principle](../SOLID-L/)
4. [Interface segregation principle](../SOLID-I/)
5. Dependency inversion principle

In this post, we are going to talk about the Interface Segregation Principle.

## 3. Interface Segregation Principle.

This is a simple but powerful principle when we talk about clean code and decouple our classes. It basically says that any class should only know about the methods it is actually using. Or, in other words, not contain methods it's not using.

You could wonder who on the earth is writing methods inside a class to not use it. Easy: a class which implements an interface, but actually only using a couple of them (the others are just stub). That is a bad practise and violates the Interface segregation principle as well.

### Why this principle is good for the code base?.

- It keeps the classes cleaner than having multiple _blank_ methods because they are not used.
- It force to decouple functionalities in small interfaces instead of having one with many use cases.

Imagine you have a big toolbox with all tools you need inside it: screws, hammer, meter, some brushes, tape and so on. It's great to have that kit, but there's a problem: the toolbox is too heavy to carry it wherever you go. If you need just the screws to help your neighbour with its rack, why are you going to carry the whole toolbox? wouldn't be better just have a case with all your screws?. That it's exactly what the principle suggests.


### Example

Let's see another example, this time with a simple code. Imagine we have a module for handling some file types and allow the user make some actions. In this case we have _Video_ files and _Music_ files. Following the previous principles we have created an interface and implemented the action inside each object.


```java
public interface FileActions {
	public void Play();

    public void Pause();

    public void Stop();
}
```

```java
public class Video implements FileActions {
    @Override
    public void Play() {
        // play the video
    }

    @Override
    public void Pause() {
        // pause the video
    }

    @Override
    public void Stop() {
        // stop the video
    }
}

```

```java
public class Music implements FileActions {
    @Override
    public void Play() {
        // play music
    }

    @Override
    public void Pause() {
        // pause music
    }

    @Override
    public void Stop() {
        // stop music
    }
}
```

This is ok, but what if we want to add a new file type: _Image_ file type?. 

First of all we need to add a new method (_draw()_) to our _FileActions_ interface. Then we have to implement that method in our already existing clases _Video_ and _Music_, and implement the _play, pause and stop_ methods in the new _Image_ class as well. Notice that would be multiple methods cointaing no code at all. For instance the _play_ method does not make sense for an _Image_, or the _draw_ method for _Music_.

So, instead of having one interface with multiple methods, is better to have multiple interface to segregate the functionalities. I have included in the solution the possibility for a video to be drawn for you to see a class with multiple interfaces. Just imagine that `videoFile.draw()` draws a thumbnail of the video.

```java
public interface Playable {
	public void Play();

    public void Pause();

    public void Stop();
}
```

```java
public interface Drawable {
    public void Draw();
}
```

```java
public class Video implements Playable, Drawable {
    @Override
    public void Play() {
        // play the video
    }

    @Override
    public void Pause() {
        // pause the video
    }

    @Override
    public void Stop() {
        // stop the video
    }

    @Override
    public void Draw() {
        // draw a thumbnail of the video
    }
}
```

```java
public class Music implements Playable {
    @Override
    public void Play() {
        // play music
    }

    @Override
    public void Pause() {
        // pause music
    }

    @Override
    public void Stop() {
        // stop music
    }
}

```

```java
public class Image implements Drawable {
    @Override
    public void Draw() {
        // draw the image
    }
}

```



