---
title: "Dependency Inversion - SOLID part 5"
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/calculator.jpg
  overlay_image: /assets/images/calculator.jpg
---

SOLID is an acronym that groups five basic principles every object oriented programmer should know. This principes set the base to write and maitain a robust code base.

1. [Single responsibility principle.](../SOLID-S/)
2. [Open/closed principle.](../SOLID-O/)
3. [Liskov substitution principle](../SOLID-L/)
4. [Interface segregation principle](../SOLID-I/)
5. [Dependency inversion principle](../SOLID-D/)

In this post, we are going to talk about the Dependency Inversion Principle.

## 3. Dependency Inversion Principle.

Probably if you are completely new to this principle it will seem a bit odd, but believe me, following the dependency injection pattern your code will be much better structured and will give you several advantages when working on it.

Theory behind this principle is that high level classes should not know about low level implementations, or create internal dependencies to other object. They should get abstractions in order to perform the necessary actions over the dependencies. 

_Depencency: If the class A, needs perform and action using the class B. We say B is a dependency of A.

In other words: a high level class which is going to perform an action depending on another class, it should get the dependency object to perform it. But shouldn't create that dependency inside it. This is _dependency injection_.

We call _dependency injection_ to the action of _inject_ a dependency from outside of the class in order to follow the principle. But remember, the principle is _Dependency Inversion_.

### Why this principle is good for the code base?.

- High level classes will not depend on implementation details.
- The dependencies can be reused along different classes or modules since we are isolating them.
- Testing will be much easier since you can mock the injected objects and test only the high level class.

### Example

As always let's see an example. Imagine that you are a _high level class_ and someone ask you to calculate a complex equation (a method). Then, you start resolving it and probably you will need a scientific calculator, but you don't have it. So, you should buy a new one (create a new object). You are depending on a _Calculator_. The solution this principle suggest is that the person asking you for resolve the equation also borrows you a calculator. You are still depending on it, but the calculator is injected from outside and you don't need to buy a new one. That's exactly _Dependency Inversion Principle_.

Take a look at the following code. We have a `UserDataBase` and a `UserTool` class that handle the user subscription. At first sight and if you don't know the principle, the code looks good. But notice that we are instantiating the database directly inside the `UserTool`, in other words, we are shadowing it. Our high level class has a strong dependency on another low level class. We can not reuse the database. And finally, if we try to test `UserTool`, the test will also depends on `UserDB`.

```java
public class UserTool {

    private UserDB userDB;

    public UserTool() {
        userDB = new UserDB();
    }

    public boolean subscribeUser(String userName) {
        String existingUser = userDB.getUser(userName);
        if (existingUser != null) {
            retur false; // the user is already subscribed
        } else {
            userDB.addUser(userName);
            return true;
        }
    }
}
```

The solution is follow the Dependency Inversion Principle, inject the dependency (in this case the database) and use it normally.

We can inject it in two ways. In the constructor or within a setter, and use it in our methods as we did previously.

```java
public class UserTool {

    private UserDB userDB;

    public UserTool(UserDB userDB) {
        this.userDB = userDB;
    }

    public boolean subscribeUser(String userName) {
        String existingUser = userDB.getUser(userName);
        if (existingUser) {
            retur false; // the user is already subscribed
        } else {
            userDB.addUser(userName);
            return true;
        }
    }
}
```

```java
public class UserTool {

    private UserDB userDB;

    public UserTool() {}

    public void setUserBD(UserDB userDB) {}
        this.userDB = userDB;
    }

    public boolean subscribeUser(String userName) {
        String existingUser = userDB.getUser(userName);
        if (existingUser) {
            retur false; // the user is already subscribed
        } else {
            userDB.addUser(userName);
            return true;
        }
    }
}
```

NOTE: for advanced dependency injection take a look to any of the multiple dependency injection framework: [Dagger 2](https://google.github.io/dagger/), [Guice](https://github.com/google/guice), or similar.
