---
title: "Single Responsibility Principle - SOLID part 1"
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/bus.jpg
  overlay_image: /assets/images/bus.jpg
---

SOLID is an acronym that groups five basic principles every object oriented programmer should know. This principles set the base to write and maintain a robust code base.

1. [Single responsibility principle.](../SOLID-S/)
2. [Open/closed principle.](../SOLID-O/)
3. [Liskov substitution principle](../SOLID-L/).
4. Interface segregation principle.
5. Dependency inversion principle

In this post, we are going to talk about the first one.

## 1. Single Responsibility Principle (SRP).

The name of this principle is quite explanatory: one object should have one, and only one responsibility. This is: have only one purpose. We should avoid our classes do several different things.

Why is this principle good for the code base?. 
- It will contribute to have a better object organisation. We won't have our features mixed and we will know which classes we should use for each task. 
- It will prevent changes propagation in our code. This is, we will have pretty focalised which classes we need to change in our code evolution.
- If we'd have a class with lot of different tasks, we would be changing it more often than a _single responsibility_ class.
- Classes with more than one resposibility tends to be coupled between them.

How can I know my object is fulfilling it? - _you may ask_. 
Well, imaging a public transport vehicle: a bus, not a coded figured bus, a real bus. 

What is the purpose of a bus?. Simple: transport passengers from one place to another. That is its responsibility. 
Could you imagine a bus that not only takes the passengers from their house to work, but also serves to the passengers a breakfast?. _Would be great I know_, but that's NOT its duty. So we could say that the bus would be violating the _Single responsibility principle_.

Now let's make an example in the code. Take a look at the following classes (forget about the error handling):

```java
public class Card {
	private int value;

	public Card(int value) {
		this.value = value;
	}

	public int getValue() {
		return value;
	}
}
```

```java
public class CardsDeck {
	private Queue<Card> allCards;

	public CardsHolder(Queue<Card> cards) {
		this.allCards = cards;
	}

	public Card get() {
		return allCards.poll();
	}

	public void mix() {
		Collections.shuffle(allCards);
	}

	public int getTotalValueOf(List<Card> cards) {
		int totalValue = 0;

		for (Card card : cards) {
			totalValue += card.getValue()
		}

		return totalValue;
	}
}
```

Can you see what's wrong in the code?
Well, we have a _Card_ representation, which holds just the value. And a _CardsDeck_ which can be created, mixed, one can take a card from it one by one and finally one can know the total value from a list of cards.
It's pretty clear that the _CardsDeck_ is doing a job out of its scope: calculating the value of a cards list. Let's clarify it: the class is supposed to handles a deck of cards, but it's not supposed to also calculates scores from it.

Fortunately, fix the issue is quite easy!. We just need to create a _CardsScoreCalculator_ class to do that kind of stuff, and remove the method from _CardsDeck_:

```java
public class CardsScoreCalculator {
	public int getTotalValueOf(List<Card> cards) {
		int totalValue = 0;

		for (Card card : cards) {
			totalValue += card.getValue()
		}

		return totalValue;
	}
}
```
